README.md, before:

# srs-daq - A data acquisition program for SRS FEC & VMM3

[![Codacy Badge](https://app.codacy.com/project/badge/Grade/7e8c956af1bc46c7836524f1ace32c11)](https://app.codacy.com/gh/YanzhaoW/srs-daq/dashboard?utm_source=gh&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=&utm_campaign=Badge_grade)

## Introduction

srs-daq is an asynchronous data IO program for SRS system.

### Included

- Readout of data
- Data deserialization from SRS system

## Building

### Prerequisites

- C++ compiler (choose either one below)
  - gcc <span>&#8805;</span> 14.2.
  - clang <span>&#8805;</span> 18

- (mini) Conda. See [this instruction](doc/install_conda.md) to install miniconda quickly.
- **(Optional)** ROOT <span>&#8805;</span> 6.32

> [!CAUTION]
> DO NOT USE Conda to install ROOT. Use latest compiler to install ROOT from the source.

### Installation

#### Step 1: Clone the latest version

```bash
git clone -b latest https://github.com/YanzhaoW/srs-daq.git
cd srs-daq
git submodule update --init
```

#### Step 2: Prepare the environment

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda activate srs
```

#### Step 3: Build the project

```bash
cmake --preset default . [optional settings]
cmake --build ./build -- -j[nproc]
```

The executable programs are compiled in the `build/bin` directory whereas the dynamic library in `build/lib`.

Following CMake preset optional settings are available:

- `-DUSE_ROOT=`
  - `OFF` or `FALSE` (default). The program would only compile with ROOT if ROOT exists. 
  - `ON` or `TRUE`. CMake configuration will fail if `ROOT` is not found. 
- `-DNO_ROOT=`
  - `OFF` or `FALSE` (default). Same as `-DUSE_ROOT=OFF`.
  - `ON` or `TRUE`. The program does NOT compiler with ROOT even if ROOT exists.

For example, to disable the ROOT dependency, run the `cmake --preset` with:

```bash
cmake --preset default . -DNO_ROOT=TRUE
```

## srs_control - The control program

<!-- To run the program, first make sure you have activated the conda environment `srs`, which can be checked by `conda info`. If not, run `conda activate srs` to activate `srs` environment. --> Go to `build/bin` directory and run

```bash
./srs_control [-p DATA_PRINT_OPTION] [-v LOG_LEVEL] [-h]
```

### Run-time options

- `-h` or `--help`: print the help message.
- `-v` or `--verbose-level`: set the verbose level. Available options: "critical", "error", "warn", "info" (default), "debug", "trace", "off".
- `-p` or `--print-mode`: set the data printing mode. Available options:
  - speed (default): print the reading rate of received data.
  - header: print the header message of received data.
  - raw: print the received raw bytes.
  - all: print all data, including header, hit and marker data, but no raw data.
- `-o` or `--output-files`: set the file outputs (more detail below).

#### Data output to multiple files

srs-daq can output received data into multiple files with different types at the same time. Currently, following output types are available (or planned):

- **binary**. File extensions: `.lmd` or `.bin`
- **json**. File extensions: `.json` (NOTE: JSON file could be very large)
- **root**. File extensions: `.root` (require ROOT library)
- **UDP socket**. Input format: `[ip]:[port]` (not yet implemented)
- **Google's protobuf**. (planned)

Users have to use the correct file extensions to enable the corresponding output types. Except the UDP socket, each output type should only have one file.

For example, to output data both to a binary file and a root file:

```bash
./srs_control -o "output.root" -o "output.bin"
```

### Custom configuration

To be added ...

## Acknowledgments

- A lot of information was used from the existing codebase of the VMM slow control software [vmmsc](https://gitlab.cern.ch/rd51-slow-control/vmmsc.git).

## TODO list

- Control/monitoring for SRS FEC & VMM3a hybrids
- Graphical user interface (typescript + react + websocket).

Commit message:

update readme with git updating

README.md, after:

# srs-daq - A data acquisition program for SRS FEC & VMM3

[![Codacy Badge](https://app.codacy.com/project/badge/Grade/7e8c956af1bc46c7836524f1ace32c11)](https://app.codacy.com/gh/YanzhaoW/srs-daq/dashboard?utm_source=gh&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=&utm_campaign=Badge_grade)

## Introduction

srs-daq is an asynchronous data IO program for SRS system.

### Included

- Readout of data
- Data deserialization from SRS system

## Building

### Prerequisites

- C++ compiler (choose either one below)
  - gcc <span>&#8805;</span> 14.2.
  - clang <span>&#8805;</span> 18

- (mini) Conda. See [this instruction](doc/install_conda.md) to install miniconda quickly.
- **(Optional)** ROOT <span>&#8805;</span> 6.32

> [!CAUTION]
> DO NOT USE Conda to install ROOT. Use latest compiler to install ROOT from the source.

### Installation

#### Step 1: Clone the latest version

```bash
git clone -b latest https://github.com/YanzhaoW/srs-daq.git
cd srs-daq
git submodule update --init
```

#### Step 2: Prepare the environment

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda activate srs
```

#### Step 3: Build the project

```bash
cmake --preset default . [optional settings]
cmake --build ./build -- -j[nproc]
```

The executable programs are compiled in the `build/bin` directory whereas the dynamic library in `build/lib`.

Following CMake preset optional settings are available:

- `-DUSE_ROOT=`
  - `OFF` or `FALSE` (default). The program would only compile with ROOT if ROOT exists. 
  - `ON` or `TRUE`. CMake configuration will fail if `ROOT` is not found. 
- `-DNO_ROOT=`
  - `OFF` or `FALSE` (default). Same as `-DUSE_ROOT=OFF`.
  - `ON` or `TRUE`. The program does NOT compiler with ROOT even if ROOT exists.

For example, to disable the ROOT dependency, run the `cmake --preset` with:

```bash
cmake --preset default . -DNO_ROOT=TRUE
```

### Update to the latest version

srs-daq is under a continuous development. To update to the latest version, run the following git commands:

```bash
git fetch origin
git checkout latest
git submodule update --init
```
After this, build the project again from [Step 3](#step-3-build-the-project).


## srs_control - The control program

<!-- To run the program, first make sure you have activated the conda environment `srs`, which can be checked by `conda info`. If not, run `conda activate srs` to activate `srs` environment. --> Go to `build/bin` directory and run

```bash
./srs_control [-p DATA_PRINT_OPTION] [-v LOG_LEVEL] [-h]
```

### Run-time options

- `-h` or `--help`: print the help message.
- `-v` or `--verbose-level`: set the verbose level. Available options: "critical", "error", "warn", "info" (default), "debug", "trace", "off".
- `-p` or `--print-mode`: set the data printing mode. Available options:
  - speed (default): print the reading rate of received data.
  - header: print the header message of received data.
  - raw: print the received raw bytes.
  - all: print all data, including header, hit and marker data, but no raw data.
- `-o` or `--output-files`: set the file outputs (more detail below).

#### Data output to multiple files

srs-daq can output received data into multiple files with different types at the same time. Currently, following output types are available (or planned):

- **binary**. File extensions: `.lmd` or `.bin`
- **json**. File extensions: `.json` (NOTE: JSON file could be very large)
- **root**. File extensions: `.root` (require ROOT library)
- **UDP socket**. Input format: `[ip]:[port]` (not yet implemented)
- **Google's protobuf**. (planned)

Users have to use the correct file extensions to enable the corresponding output types. Except the UDP socket, each output type should only have one file.

For example, to output data both to a binary file and a root file:

```bash
./srs_control -o "output.root" -o "output.bin"
```

### Custom configuration

To be added ...

## Acknowledgments

- A lot of information was used from the existing codebase of the VMM slow control software [vmmsc](https://gitlab.cern.ch/rd51-slow-control/vmmsc.git).

## TODO list

- Control/monitoring for SRS FEC & VMM3a hybrids
- Graphical user interface (typescript + react + websocket).
